The iridescent bubbles were beautiful.  But they were the falsest thing
in the sea and the old man loved to see the big sea turtles eating
them.  The turtles saw them, approached them from the front, then shut
their eyes so they were completely carapaced and ate them filaments and
all.  The old man loved to see the turtles eat them and he loved to
walk on them on the beach after a storm and hear them pop when he
stepped on them with the horny soles of his feet.

He loved green turtles and hawks-bills with their elegance and speed
and their great value and he had a friendly contempt for the huge,
stupid loggerheads, yellow in their armour-plating, strange in their
love-making, and happily eating the Portuguese men-of-war with their
eyes shut.

He had no mysticism about turtles although he had gone in turtle boats
for many years.  He was sorry for them all, even the great trunk backs
that were as long as the skiff and weighed a ton.  Most people are
heartless about turtles because a turtle's heart will beat for hours
after he has been cut up and butchered.  But the old man thought, I
have such a heart too and my feet and hands are like theirs.  He ate
the white eggs to give himself strength.  He ate them all through May
to be strong in September and October for the truly big fish.

He also drank a cup of shark liver oil each day from the big drum in
the shack where many of the fishermen kept their gear.  It was there
for all fishermen who wanted it.  Most fishermen hated the taste.  But
it was no worse than getting up at the hours that they rose and it was
very good against all colds and grippes and it was good for the eyes.

Now the old man looked up and saw that the bird was circling again.

"He's found fish," he said aloud.  No flying fish broke the surface and
there was no scattering of bait fish.  But as the old man watched, a
small tuna rose in the air, turned and dropped head first into the
water.  The tuna shone silver in the sun and after he had dropped back
into the water another and another rose and they were jumping in all
directions, churning the water and leaping in long jumps after the
bait.  They were circling it and driving it.

If they don't travel too fast I will get into them, the old man
thought, and he watched the school working the water white and the bird
now dropping and dipping into the bait fish that were forced to the
surface in their panic.

"The bird is a great help," the old man said.  Just then the stern line
came taut under his foot, where he had kept a loop of the line, and he
dropped his oars and felt the weight of the small tuna's shivering pull
as he held the line firm and commenced to haul it in.  The shivering
increased as he pulled in and he could see the blue back of the fish in
the water and the gold of his sides before he swung him over the side
and into the boat.  He lay in the stern in the sun, compact and bullet
shaped, his big, unintelligent eyes staring as he thumped his life out
against the planking of the boat with the quick shivering strokes of
his neat, fast-moving tail.  The old man hit him on the head for
kindness and kicked him, his body still shuddering, under the shade of
the stern.

"Albacore," he said aloud.  "He'll make a beautiful bait.  He'll weigh
ten pounds."

He did not remember when he had first started to talk aloud when he was
by himself.  He had sung when he was by himself in the old days and he
had sung at night sometimes when he was alone steering on his watch in
the smacks or in the turtle boats.  He had probably started to talk
aloud, when alone, when the boy had left.  But he did not remember.
When he and the boy fished together they usually spoke only when it was
necessary.  They talked at night or when they were storm-bound by bad
weather.  It was considered a virtue not to talk unnecessarily at sea
and the old man had always considered it so and respected it.  But now
he said his thoughts aloud many times since there was no one that they
could annoy.

"If the others heard me talking out loud they would think that I am
crazy," he said aloud.  "But since I am not crazy, I do not care.  And
the rich have radios to talk to them in their boats and to bring them
the baseball."

Now is no time to think of baseball, he thought.  Now is the time to
think of only one thing.  That which I was born for.  There might be a
big one around that school, he thought.  I picked up only a straggler
from the albacore that were feeding.  But they are working far out and
fast.  Everything that shows on the surface today travels very fast and
to the north-east.  Can that be the time of day?  Or is it some sign of
weather that I do not know?

He could not see the green of the shore now but only the tops of the
blue hills that showed white as though they were snow-capped and the
clouds that looked like high snow mountains above them.  The sea was
very dark and the light made prisms in the water.  The myriad flecks of
the plankton were annulled now by the high sun and it was only the
great deep prisms in the blue water that the old man saw now with his
lines going straight down into the water that was a mile deep.

The tuna, the fishermen called all the fish of that species tuna and
only distinguished among them by their proper names when they came to
sell them or to trade them for baits, were down again.  The sun was hot
now and the old man felt it on the back of his neck and felt the sweat
trickle down his back as he rowed.

I could just drift, he thought, and sleep and put a bight of line
around my toe to wake me.  But today is eighty-five days and I should
fish the day well.

Just then, watching his lines, he saw one of the projecting green
sticks dip sharply.

"Yes," he said.  "Yes," and shipped his oars without bumping the boat.
He reached out for the line and held it softly between the thumb and
forefinger of his right hand.  He felt no strain nor weight and he held
the line lightly.  Then it came again.  This time it was a tentative
pull, not solid nor heavy, and he knew exactly what it was.  One
hundred fathoms down a marlin was eating the sardines that covered the
point and the shank of the hook where the hand-forged hook projected
from the head of the small tuna.

The old man held the line delicately, and softly, with his left hand,
unleashed it from the stick.  Now he could let it run through his
fingers without the fish feeling any tension.

This far out, he must be huge in this month, he thought.  Eat them,
fish.  Eat them.  Please eat them.  How fresh they are and you down
there six hundred feet in that cold water in the dark.  Make another
turn in the dark and come back and eat them.

He felt the light delicate pulling and then a harder pull when a
sardine's head must have been more difficult to break from the hook.
Then there was nothing.